>> Woodruff: U.S. LAWMAKERS
CALLED TODAY FOR EDWARD SNOWDEN,
THE MAN BEHIND THE LEAK OF
CLASSIFIED GOVERNMENT
SURVEILLANCE PROGRAMS, TO BE
PROSECUTED TO THE FULL EXTENT OF
THE LAW.
GOOD EVENING.
I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
>> Ifill: AND I'M GWEN IFILL.
ON THE NEWSHOUR TONIGHT, WE GET
TWO TAKES ON THE N.S.A. STORY.
FIRST, WE EXAMINE HOW THE
INTELLIGENCE COMMUNITY'S
RELIANCE ON CONTRACTORS MAY PUT
TOP-SECRET INFORMATION AT RISK.
>> Woodruff: THEN, GOOGLE IS THE
FIRST TECH GIANT TO RESPOND ON-
CAMERA ABOUT ITS ROLE IN THE
PRISM PROGRAM.
JEFFREY BROWN TALKS TO THE
COMPANY'S CHIEF COUNSEL.
>> WE DO NOT PARTICIPATE IN
ANY KIND OF A PROGRAM THAT
GIVES THE GOVERNMENT ANY
ACCESS TO OUR SERVERS,
DIRECT OR OTHERWISE, NOR DO
WE ALLOW THE GOVERNMENT TO
PLACE ANY KIND OF EQUIPMENT
ON OUR SYSTEMS.
>> Ifill: WE UPDATE THE FIGHT
OVER CONTRACEPTION, AS THE
JUSTICE DEPARTMENT REVERSES ITS
POSITION, AND ALLOWS THE MORNING
AFTER PILL TO BE SOLD OVER THE
COUNTER TO WOMEN AND GIRLS.
>> Woodruff: WE CONTINUE OUR
SERIES ON FOOD SECURITY WITH A
REPORT FROM QATAR ON INNOVATIVE
WAYS TO COMBAT A LACK OF WATER
WITH A BOOMING POPULATION.
>> THE TECHNOLOGIES CA BEN
APPLIED ANYWHERE.
BUT IN THE DESERT IS A HOT
AND RELATIVELY DRY CLIMATE,
WHERE YOU HAVE ACCESS TO
FILTHY WATER.
>> Ifill: AND RAY SUAREZ HAS THE
STORY OF TWO TERMINALLY ILL
CHILDREN, AND THE BATTLE TWEEBEN
DOCTORS AND JUDGES OVER WHETHER
THEY SHOULD BE ELIGIBLE TO
RECEIVE ADULT LUNGS.
>> Woodruff: THAT'S ALL AHEAD ON
TONIGHT'S NEWSHOUR.
>> Ifill: DEFENDERS OF EXPANSIVE
SURVEILLANCE BY THE GOVERNMENT
STEPPED UP DEMANDS TODAY TO GO
AFTER AN INTELLIGENCE CONTRACTOR
WHO EXPOSED THE SECRET PROGRAMS.
THE TARGET OF THEIR IRE REMAINED
OUT OF SIGHT, AS INVESTIGATIONS
OF THE LEAK GAINED MOMENTUM.
>> HE'S A TRAITOR.
>> HOUSE SPEAKER JOHN
BOEHNER'S STRONG WORDS THIS
MORNING WERE TARGETED AT
ELUSIVE FORMER CEA EMPLOYEE
EDWARD SNOWDEN.
>E  THIS
INFORMATION PUTS AMERICANS
AT RISK.
IT SHOWS OUR ADVERSARIES
WHAT OUR CAPABILITIES ARE.
AND IT IS A GIANT VIOLATION
OF THE LAW.
>> Ifill: BAINER'S SENATE
COUNTERPART MINORITY LEADER
MITCH McCONNELL WENT EVEN
FURTHER.
>> WHAT'S DIICULFFT TO
UNDERSTAND IS THE MOTIVATION
OF SOMEONE WITHOUT WOULD
INTENTIONALLY SEEK TO WARN
OUR NATION'S ENEMIES OF THE
LAWFUL PROGRAMS CREATED TO
PROTECT THE AMERICAN PEOPLE.
AND I HOPE THAT HE IS
PROSECUTED TO THE FULL
EXTENT OF THE LAW.
>> Ifill: SNOWDEN BRIEFLY
WORKED AS A CONTRACTOR AT
THE NATIONAL SECURITY AGENCY
WHERE HE LEARNED OF SWEEPING
EFFORTS TO MINE PHONE DATA
AND MONITOR E-MAILS AND
OTHER DIGITAL RECORDS.
TODAY HIS EMPLOYER, DEFENSE
CONSULTANT BOOZE ALLEN
HAMILTON ANNOUNCED THAT
AFTER THREE MONTHS ON A JOB
FOR WHICH HE WAS PAID
$122,000 A YEAR, HE'S BEEN
FIRED FOR ETHICS VIOLATIONS.
SNOWDEN'S LAST KNOWN
LOCATION WAS HONG KONG.
BUT HE CHECKED OUT OF HIS
HOTEL THERE YESTERDAY.
HE COULD FACE CRIMINAL
CHARGES IN THE U.S. ONCE THE
JUSTICE DEPARTMENT FINISHES
ITS INVESTIGATION.
AT THE WHITE HOUSE TODAY
PRESS SECRETARY JAY CARNEY
SAID ONE THING IS CLEAR.
>> IT IS IMPORTANT TO NOTE
THAT WHEN IT COMES TO
CONTRACTORS, THEY SWEAR AN
OATH TO PROTECT CLASSIFIED
SECRETS JUST AS GOVERNMENT
WORKERS DO.
AND THAT IS IMPORTANT TO
REMEMBER.
>> Ifill: CARNEY ALSO
CONFIRMED THE NSA IS DOING A
DAMAGE ASSESSMENT OF ANY
HARM DONE BY THE DICLOSURES.
BUT NOT EVERY MEMBER OF
CONGRESS SEES SNOWDEN AS THE
PROBLEM.
DEMOCRATIC SENATOR RON WIDEN
OF OREGON WANTS HARRINGS ON
THE NSA'S ACTIVITIES.
HE SUGGESTED THAT DIRECTOR
OF NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE
JAMES CLAPPER DID NOT TELL
THE TRUTH LAST MARCH WHEN HE
DENIED MASSIVE MONITORING
WAS TAKING PLACE.
LAWMAKERS WERE BRIEFED BY
NSA OFFICIALS ON CAPITOL
HILL TODAY.
MANY STILL APPEAR TO SUPPORT
THE AGENCY.
SENATE MAJORITY LEADER HARRY
REID SAYS CONGRESSIONAL
OVERSIGHT HAS BEEN ROBUST.
>> THAT'S WHY THE AMERICAN
PEOPLE, TWO POLLS I SAW
TODAY, SUPPORT WHAT IS
HAPPENING WITH TRYING TO
STOP TERRORISTS FROM DOING
BAD THINGS TO US.
>> Ifill: IDE ADDING TO THE
DEBATE THE PERSON CIVIL
LIBERTIES UNION ANNOUNCED IT
HAS FILED SUIT CHARGING THAT
THE PHONE DATA COLLECTION
VIOLATES THE RIGHT TO FREE
SPEECH AND PRIVACY.
BUT THE UPREMEMBER ALSO
EXTENDS OVERSEAS.
IN BRUSSELS THE EUROPEAN
UNION PARLIAMENT MET IN
EMERGENCY SESSION TO CUSS
WHAT THE U.S. SURVEILLANCE
HAS VIOLATED A CIVIL
LIBERTIES OF EUROPEANS.
SNOWDEN'S REVELATIONS HAVE SOME
WONDERING THAT IF A 29-YEAR-OLD
DROPOUT GOT ACCESS TO CLASSIFIED
DOCUMENTS, WHO ELSE OUTSIDE
GOVERNMENT DOES?
TO HELP US FIND ANSWERS, I'M
JOINED BY "WASHINGTON POST"
INVESTIGATIVE REPORTER DANA
PRIEST, AUTHOR OF "TOP SECRET
AMERICA: THE RISE OF THE NEW
AMERICAN SECURITY STATE."
AND IRVING LACHOW, DIRECTOR OF
THE PROGRAM ON TECHNOLOGY AND
U.S. NATIONAL SECURITY AT THE
CENTER FOR A NEW AMERICAN
SECURITY.
DANA PRIEST, YOU WORKED ON
AN INVESTIGATION OF THIS
KIND OF TOP SECRET ACTIVITY
FOR TWO YEARS.
HOW EXTENSIVE WOULD YOU SAY
IT IS?
>> WELL, AFTER 9/11 THE
GOVERNMENT DECIDED TO VASTLY
INCREASE WHAT IT COULD DO,
AND THE SIZE OF ITS
INTELLIGENCE AGENCIES
WITHOUT HIRING MORE FEDERAL
EMPLOYEES.
AND THE ONLY WAY THAT IT
COULD DO THAT WAS TO HIRE
MORE CONTRACTORS.
AND WE REPORTED AND THEN THE
GOVERNMENT FOLLOWED UP AND
REPORTED THAT THERE WERE
NEARLY 400,000 CONTRACTORS
WITH TOP SECRET CLEARANCE.
THREE TIMES THAT MANY WITH
SECRET CLEARANCE.
SO WE'RE TALKING ABOUT AN
INCREASED POOL OF PEOPLE
WITHOUT DO SWEAR AN OATH WHO
UNDERSTAND THAT THEY ARE NOT
ALLOWED TO SHARE CLASSIFIED
INFORMATION, WHO GO THROUGH
AT THE TOP SECRET LEVEL
PRETTY INTRUSIVE BACKGROUND
CHECKS.
BUT NONETHELESS, YOU OPEN UP
YOURSELF TO MORE RISK-- RISK
WHEN YOU BRING ON PEOPLE
ESPECIALLY IN A QUICK MAN
THEIR HAPPENED AFTER 9/11,
WHEN PEOPLE WANTED TO
INCREASE THE CAPABILITIES
THAT THE GOVERNMENT HAD, AND
THEY HIRED PEOPLE QUICKLY.
AND THEN THEY GOT A
BOTTLENECK IN THOSE REVIEWS
OF THEIR BACKGROUND AND THE
GAO OF THE GOVERNMENT AGENCY
THAT LOOKS AT HOW THE
GOVERNMENT WORKS DID FIND
THAT THERE WAS SOME SHORTCUTS
IN THE WAY THAT SECURITY
CLEARANCES WERE DOCUMENTED
AND GIVEN OUT.
SO I THINK THAT, YOU KNOW,
THIS IS AN INCREASED RISK
WHEN YOU HIRE CONTRACTORS.
ON THE OTHER HAND, I THINK
REALLY WHAT IT SHOWS, IS
THAT THE GOVERNMENT STILL IS
COMING TO GRIPS WITH ITS OWN
COMPUTER SYSTEMS.
ONE OF THE LARGEST NUMBER OF
CONTRACTORS ARE IN THE FIELD
THAT MR. SNOWDEN SAYS THAT
HE WAS IN, WHICH IS THE IT
FIELD.
>> Ifill: LET ME ASK IRVING
LACHOW ABOUT PEOPLE LIKE
EDWARD SNOWDEN AND EVEN
BRADLEY MANNING.
HOW DO THEY GET ACCESS TO
THESE DOCUMENTS?
HOW DO YOU GET A SECRET
SECURITY CLEARANCE SO HIGH
THAT YOU CAN DO THIS MUCH
DAMAGE?
>> WELL, SO THEY GO THROUGH
A PROCESS, A BACKGROUND
INVESTIGATION.
AND IF THEY ARE VETTED
SUCCESSFULLY THAN THEN THEY
ARE GRANTED ACCESS TO A
GIVEN LEVEL>xd
AND ONCE YOU HAVE ACCESS TO
THAT INFORMATION, THERE ARE
COMPUTER NETWORKS THAT ARE
AVAILABLE THAT HAVE A LOT OF
INFORMATION AT THAT LEVEL OF
CLASSIFICATION, WHERE YOU
CAN JUST GO AND DO A SEARCH
AND FIND MUCH OF THAT
INFORMATION.
AND SO IF YOU ARE BRADLEY
MANNING, YOU CAN DO A SEARCH
AND FIND ALL THIS KIND OF
INFORMATION.
IN HIS CASE, DOWNLOAD IT TO
A DISK AND POTENTIALLY WALK
OUT THE DOOR WITH IT.
>> Ifill: ARE PROTECTIONS
SUFFICIENT.
FOR INSTANCE, WE HEARD EARLY
ON IN THIS SET, EVEN BEFORE
EDWARD SNOWDEN'S STORY HAD
COME OUT, THE LEAKS IT
ACTUALLY BEEN PUBLISHED THAT
THE GOVERNMENT WAS ON TO
HIM.
IS THAT ALWAYS WHAT HAPPENS?
OR DO WE KNOW THAT THERE ARE
MOLES WORKING IN THE
GOVERNMENT WHO WE NEVER
FIND?
>> WELL, SO THE GOVERNMENT
IS AWARE THAT THERE ARE
PEOPLE WHO ARE GOING TO BE
TRYING TO DO THIS KIND OF
THING.
AND SO THERE ARE A LOT OF
CONTROLS IN PLACE, AND
THERE'S A LOT OF ACTIVITY IN
PLACE TO TRY TO CATCH ANY
KIND OF ACTIVITIES BUT IT
CAN BE VERY DIFFICULT.
AS DANA POINTED OUT, THERE
ARE TENS OF THOUSANDS, IF
NOT HUNDREDS OF THOUSANDS OF
PEOPLE WHO HAVE ACCESS TO
THE HIGHEST, THE MOST
SENSITIVE INFORMATION THAT
OUR COUNTRY HAS.
AND IT CAN BE VERY DIFFICULT
TO CONTROL WHO SHOULD HAVE
ACCESS TO WHAT INFORMATION
AT WHAT TIME.
BECAUSE EVERYONE IS WORKING
ON DIFFERENT PROJECTS,
DIFFERENT PROGRAMS.
THEY MIGHT BE DOING RESEARCH,
SO IT CAN BECOME VERY
DIFFICULT TO UNDERSTAND WHO
IS DOING SOMETHING
LEGITIMATE AND WHO IS D
DO SOMETHING THEY SHOULDN'T
BE DOING.
>> Ifill: SO HOW DO THEY
MANAGE THIS, WHAT KIND OF
CONTROLS CAN THEY IMPOSE?
>> WELL, THERE ARE TWO
THINGS RIGHT OFF THE BAT.
ONE IS THAT PEOPLE ARE
REGULARLY POLYGRAPHED, MAYBE
ONCE A YEAR TO MAKE SURE
THAT THEY STILL PASS, THAT
NOTHING HAS CHANGED IN THEIR
BACKGROUND THAT WOULD
INDICATE A RISK.
THE OTHER THING REALLY IS
THAT THEY DO RELY ON OTHER
EMPLOYEES TO NOTICE
DIFFERENCES AND TO REPORT
THEM.
AND THEY DO HAVE
COUNTERINTELLIGENCE PEOPLE
WHO ARE EMPLOYED TO DO JUST
THAT, TO FOLLOW PEOPLE INTO
THE WATERING HOLES THAT THEY
FREQUENT, AND INTO THE
SOCIAL SETTINGS THAT THEY
FREQUENT, ESPECIALLY IF
THERE IS A SUSPICION ABOUT
SOMEBODY.
BECAUSE THEY ARE TRYING TO
CATCH SOMETHING LIKE THIS
BEFORE IT HAPPENS.
BUT IN THE MANNING CASE, FOR
EXAMPLE, EVEN THOUGH HE
TECHNICALLY HAD ACCESS TO
WHAT HE DOWNLOADED, IN THE
AFTER-ACTION REVIEW THAT
THEY DID, HE SHOULDN'T HAVE.
THE STATE DEPARTMENT'S
COMPUTER SYSTEM SHOULD NOT
HAVE ALLOWED, THEY
DETERMINED LATER, SOMEONE
WHO WAS STUDYING ONE
PARTICULAR TYPE OF TERRORIST
TO HAVE ACCESS TO STATE
DEPARTMENT CABLES FROM
AROUND THE WORLD.
SO THEY'RE STILL REALLY
TRYING TO ADJUST THEIR
COMPUTER SYSTEMS TO GIVE
ACCESS TO PEOPLE WHO HAVE A
NEED TO KNOW ABOUT
PARTICULAR PROGRAMS.
>> Ifill: LAST NIGHT WE HAD
THE FORMER DIRECTOR OF
INTELLIGENCE ON THIS
PROGRAM.
AND HE ACTUALLY IN AN
INTERESTING INTERVIEW WITH
DANA FOR HER SERIES, SAID,
YOU KNOW, SURE WE'VE
EXPANDED.
SURE WE'RE DOING MORE.
BUT IT'S WORTH>dc/ OVERDOING.
IS IT WORTH OVERDOINGN I
YOUR OPINION?
>> I THINK THAT IS WHAT-- .
>> Rooney: I --.
>> Ifill: I SHOULD ASK
NG COME
BACK TO YOU, DANA.
>> WELL, I THINK IT DEPENDS.
SO THERE ARE ALWAYS
TRADE-OFFS.
THERE ARE TRADE-OFFS BETWEEN
SECURITY AND LIBERTY THERE
ARE TRADE-OFFS WITH RELYING
ON CONTRACTORS.
SO THE BENEFIT OF USING
CONTRACTORS IS THEY'RE EASY
TO HIRE AND FIRE OR AT LEAST
MUCH EASIER THAN GOVERNMENT
PERSONNEL.
SO IT GIVES YOU A LOT MORE
FLEXIBILITY TO BRING PEOPLE
IN WITH SPECIAL EXPERTISE.
PEOPLE THAT ARE HARD TO
BRING INTO THE GOVERNMENT ON
A REGULAR BASIS.
BUT THERE ARE RISKS.
SO YOU ARE RELYING ON PEOPLE,
THERE NEEDS TO BE OVERSIGHT
AND OFTENTIMES THE
GOVERNMENT PERSONNEL WHO ARE
OVERSEEING THE CONTRACTORS
MAY NOT UNDERSTAND,
ESPECIALLY ON SOME TECHNICAL
ISSUES.
THEY MAY NOT HAVE THE
KNOWLEDGE THAT THE
CONTRACTORS DO.
SO MAYBE THEY DON'T HAVE A
DETAILED UNDERSTANDING WHAT
IS GOING ON UNDERNEATH THEM.
THERE ARE SOME RISKS THAT
YOU POTENTIALLY INTRODUCE
INTO THE SYSTEM.
>> Ifill: YOU WERE GOING TO
SAY?
>> YOU CAN SEE FROM THE
REACTIONS THAT HAVE FOLLOWED
THIS, THAT SOME PEOPLE THINK
IT'S WORTH OVERDOING AND
SOME PEOPLE DON'T.
AND SOME PEOPLE WOULD JUST
LIKE MORE INFORMATION.
THE SENATE INTELLIGENCE
COMMIEE, TTFOR EXAMPLE,
TODAY GOT BRIEFED BY
GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS ON THE
PROGRAM AGAIN.
AND IMMEDIATELY CAME OUT AND
SAID THEY WOULD LIKE SOME OF
THE IT DECLASSIFIED.
THE SAME SORT OF INFORMATION
THAT'S NOW BEING TOUTED AS
TREASONIST, THEY WOULD LIKE
TO DECLASSIFY SO THAT WE
COULD LEARN MORE ABOUT IT.
SO OBVIOUSLY THERE ARE
PEOPLE THAT THINK SOME OF
THAT INFORMATION DOESN'T
DAMAGE NATIONAL SECURITY.
IT PROBABLY BELIES SOME OF
THE MYTHS THAT ARE GROWING
UP NOW AS WE SPEAK AROUND
THESE PROGRAMS.
SO THE DEBATE IS WHAT
MR. SNOWDEN SAYS HE WAS ALL
ABOUT.
AND OBVIOUSLY HAS SOME
CONCERNS ABOUT THE PROGRAM.
I DON'T FEEL ANYBODY CAN
REALLY MAKE A DECISION ON
WHETHER IT'S TOO MUCH
WITHOUT KNOWING WHAT IT IS.
>> Ifill: IRVING LACHOW S IT
POSSIBLE THAT WE AS CITIZENS
ARE GIVING AWAY AS MUCH
INFORMATION AS THEY ARE
GETTING FROM US WHEN WE TALK
ABOUT, ESPECIALLY, THE
SOCIAL MEDIA SITES?
>> ABSOLUTELY.
SO I THINK WITHOUT KNOWING
IT, WE ALL AS WE DO OUR
DAILY BUSINESS, USE SOCIAL
MEDIA, GO ON THE INTERNET.
WE ARE GIVING AWAY SO MUCH
INFORMATION.
I THINK MOST AMERICANS DON'T
HAVE ANY IDEA HOW MUCH, WHAT
COMPANIES DO JUST BY
TRACKING OUR BEHAVIOR.
THEY DON'T NEED TO SEE THE
CONTENT OF WHAT WE DO, BUT
JUST BY BEING ABLE TO TRACK
WHERE WE GO, WHAT WE DO, OUR
GEO LOCATION, THEY CAN PUT
TOGETHER A PICTURE OF WHO WE
ARE, HOW OLD WE ARE, HOW
MUCH MONEY WE MAKE, WHO OUR
FRIENDS ARE.
IT'S REMARKABLE WHAT YOU CAN
DO WITH THAT KIND OF MEHTA
DOES DATA WHICH IS EXACTLY
THE KIND OF INFORMATION THAT
WAS BEING COLLECTED FROM THE
PHONE RECORDS.
AND SO I THINK WITHOUT
KNOWING IT, MANY OF US ARE
GIVING AWAY A TREMENDOUS
AMOUNT OF INFORMATION.
>> Ifill: IS THERE A
DIFFERENCE BETWEEN GIVING IT
AWAY TO GOVERNMENT AND
GIVING IT AWAY TO PRIVATE
INDUSTRY?
>> ABSOLUTELY.
BECAUSE WHAT PRIVACY
ADVOCATES ARE MOST WORRIED
ABOUT THE THE STORAGE OF
THIS DATA.
SO I MAY NOT BE UNDER
SUSPICION RIGHT NOW, TEN
YEARS FROM NOW, YOU KNOW,
THEY'RE LOOKING AT THREE
DIFFERENT SETS OF MY DIGITAL
EXHAUST.
AND THEY MAY DECIDE
SOMETHING SUSPICIOUS.
SO THEY CAN GO BACK AND MINE
THE DATA THAT THEY HAVE FROM
TEN YEARS AGO AND THAT'S
WHAT CAUTIONS-- CAUSES
PRIVACY ADVOCATES MOST
CONCERN.
IS THAT YOU WILL HAVE THIS
GIANT DATABASE OF
INFORMATION ABOUT AMERICANS
IN THE VER IDENTIFIESON
VERIZON PHONE RECORDS.
>> Ifill: DANA PRIEST OF THE
"WASHINGTON POST", IRVING
LACHOW OF THE CENTER FOR NEW
AMERICAN SECURITY.
THANK YOU BOTH VERY MUCH.
>> THANKS.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Woodruff: WE'LL HAVE MORE ON
THE N.S.A. SURVEILLANCE PROGRAMS
WITH A RESPONSE FROM GOOGLE'S
TOP LAWYER LATER IN THE
BROADCAST.
ALSO AHEAD ON THE NEWSHOUR, THE
MORNING AFTER PILL FOR WOMEN AND
GIRLS; HOW TO MAKE THE MOST OF
WATER IN THE DESERT; AND THE
FIGHT OVER GIVING ADULT LUNGS TO
CHILDREN IN NEED OF A
TRANSPLANT.
BUT FIRST, THE OTHER NEWS OF THE
DAY.
HERE'S KWAME HOLMAN.
>> Holman: THE IMMIGRATION
REFORM BILL IN THE U.S. SENATE
CLEARED A KEY HURDLE TODAY.
IT GARNERED WELL MORE THAN THE
60 VOTES NEEDED TO BEGIN FORMAL
DEBATE.
BUT POSSIBLE FINAL PASSAGE STILL
IS MANY DAYS OFF.
AT THE RISK OF STATING THE
OBVIOUS THE BILL HAS SERIOUS
FLAWS.
>> THERE ARE 11 MILLION
REASONS TO HAVE COMMON SENSE
IMMIGRATION REFORMS.
>> THAT IS HOW THINGS IN THE
SENATE BEGAN, AN INDICATOR
OF THE BUMPY ROAD THE BILL
STILL HAS TO TRAVEL DESPITE
TAKING ITS FIRST STEPS
TODAY.
THE SENATE MEASURE WOULD
BOOST BORDER SECURITY,
CREATE A 13 YEAR PATH TO
CITIZENSHIP FOR 11 MILLION
IMMIGRANTS CURRENTLY IN THE
COUNTRY ILLEGALLY.
AND ALLOW TENS OF THOUSANDS
OF NEW WORKERS INTO THE
COUNTRY.
NEW YORK DEMOCRAT CHUCK
SCHUMER IS PART OF THE
BIPARTISAN GANG OF EIGHT WHO
CRAFTED THE BILL.
HE SAID TODAY THE STATUS QUO
SUN ACCEPTABLE.
>> OUR BILL IS BASED ON ONE
SIMPLE PRINCIPLES.
THAT THE AMERICAN PEOPLE
WILL ACCEPT AND EMBRACE
COMMON SENSE SOLUTIONS TO
FUTURE LEGAL IMMIGRATION AND
TO THE 11 MILLION NOW LIVING
HERE IN THE SHADOWS, IF AND
ONLY IF THEY ARE CONVINCED
THAT THERE WILL NOT BE
FUTURE WAVES OF ILLEGAL
IMMIGRATION.
>> OTHER GANG OF EIGHT
MEMBER REPUBLICAN MARCO
RUBIO OF FLORIDA SAID
HELPING IMPROVE THE WORK
FORCE IS KEY.
>> BUT ISSUE NUMBER ONE, THE
FUNDAMENTAL REASON WHY WE
HAVE TO DO IMMIGRATION
REFORM, IS BECAUSE WE DO NOT
HAVE A 21st CENTURY
IMMIGRATION SYSTEM.
OUR IMMIGRATION SYSTEM TODAY
IS LARGELY BUILT ON THE IDEA
VE
LIVING HERE IT IS EASIER FOR
YOU TO COME THAN IF YOU HAVE
A SPECIAL SKILL OR TALENT
THAT YOU ARE OFFERING TO THE
CONTRIBUTE COUNTRY TO
CONTRIBUTE.
>> AT THE WHITE HOUSE
PRESIDENT OBAMA URGED
LAWMAKERS TO GET THE JOB
DONE SOON.
>> NOW'S THE TIME TO GET IT
DONE.
THERE'S NO GOOD REASON
>> Holman: THE LOWER HOUSE OF
PARLIAMENT IN RUSSIA VOTED
OVERWHELMINGLY TODAY FOR A BILL
THAT TARGETS GAYS.
THE VOTE WAS 436 TO NOTHING FOR
REGULATIONS AGAINST WHAT THE
BILL CALLS THE "PROPAGANDA OF
NON-TRADITIONAL SEXUAL
RELATIONS."
IT DIRECTLY BANS DISCUSSING
HOMOSEXUALITY WITH CHILDREN.
POLICE DETAINED MORE THAN TWO
DOZEN GAY RIGHTS DEMONSTRATORS
OUTSIDE THE STATE DUMA IN MOSCOW
AFTER THEY WERE ATTACKED BY
HUNDREDS IN AN ANTI-GAY CROWD.
THE MEASURE STILL REQUIRES
APPROVAL OF THE UPPER HOUSE OF
PARLIAMENT.
IN TURKEY, AUTHORITIES DEMANDED
AN END TO TEN DAYS OF
ANTIGOVERNMENT PROTESTS, AND
RIOT POLICE TARGETED CROWDS IN
CENTRAL ISTANBUL WITH WATER
CANNON AND TEAR GAS.
THE TROUBLE CAME IN SPASMS
THROUGHOUT THE DAY, AND FLARED
AGAIN AFTER NIGHTFALL.
WE HAVE A REPORT FROM INIGO
GILMORE OF INDEPENDENT
TELEVISION NEWS.
DE --
>> THEY MOVE IN TO TEXTAN
SQUARE EN MASSE.
A GROUP OF PROTESTORS TRY TO
BLOCK THEIR PATH.
THEY RAISE THEIR HANDS
IMPLORING THE POLICE TO GO
NO FURTHER, ALL TO NO AVAIL.
SUDDENLY THE TEAR GAS COMES
POURING IN, AND IT KEEPS
ONCOMING.
WE WATCHED AS THE POLICE
WATER CANONS WENT TO WORK.
CLEAR INTENT ON PREVENTS THE
SQUARE OF PROTESTORS.
TO MANY T WAS A SEVERE
PROVOCATION.
WHILE THERE WERE CALLS FOR
RESTRAINT, SOME FOUGHT WITH
THE POLICE.
ROCKS WERE HURLED.
MOLOTOV COCKTAILS TOO.
SOME PROTESTORS LATER
CLAIMED THAT THOSE THROWING
PETRO BOMBS WERE POLICE PRO
CAC-- PROVACATEURS INSISTING
THEY BELIEVE IN PEACEFUL
PROCESS-- PROTESTS.
MANY-- TO ENGAGE IN DIALOGUE
WITH THE PROTESTORS BUT TO
THEM HE'S NOW SHOWING HIS
TRUE COLORS.
THE PATIENCE OF TURKEY'S TOP
MAN HAS SNAPPED.
THE OPERATION IN THE SQUARE
WAS FULL SWING.
THE TURKISH PRIME MINISTER,
BULLISH AND DEFIANT RECEIVED
A RAPTUREOUS WELCOME FROM
HIS LOYAL SUPPORTERS IN
PARLIAMENT.
>> TO THOSE WHO WANT TO
CONTINUE WITH THESE
INCIDENTS, I SAY IT'S OVER.
BE WARNED.
WE WILL NOT TOLERATE IT ANY
MORE.
>> THE PROTESTORS IN THE
PARK DETERMINED TO STAND
THEIR GROUND, AS THEY
MARCHED AROUND THEY CHANTED
THIS IS JUST THE BEGINNING
OF THE STRUGGLE.
I CAME ACROSS A MUSIC
TEACHER.
>> IT HAS BEEN ALWAYS TOUGH,
YOU KNOW, THAT IS LAW, THAT
IS WHAT HE HAS BEEN PLAYING.
THAT IS I THINK HIS ROLE IN
THIS WHOLE GAME.
BUT THIS IS THE UGLIEST.
>> Reporter: AS CLASHES
CONTINUE THIS EVENING, THIS
IS A BATTLE WHICH PUT AS
SIDE NOT ONLY THE FACE OF
THE PAST BUT THE FUTURE
DIRECTION OF THIS COUNTRY.
WITH SECULAR MIDDLE CLASS
PROTESTORS LINING UP AGAINST
A CONSERVATIVE ISLAMIST
PRIME MINISTER AND HIS
FOLLOWERS, BOTH SIDES FEEL
THEY REPRESENT THE TRUE SOUL
OF TURKEY.
>> Holman: THE CLASHES CONTINUED
WELL AFTER DARK, AS TENS OF
THOUSANDS OF PROTESTERS RETURNED
TO THE PARK, AND POLICE ATTACKED
WITH MORE TEAR GAS.
THE GOVERNOR OF ISTANBUL
ANNOUNCED THE POLICE OPERATIONS
WILL CONTINUE AROUND THE CLOCK.
AT LEAST 17 PEOPLE DIED IN
AFGHANISTAN TODAY, WHEN A
SUICIDBOMBE ER BLEW HIMSELF UP
OUTSIDE THE SUPREME COURT IN
KABUL.
IT WAS THE SECOND ATTACK IN AS
MANY DAYS IN THE AFGHAN CAPITAL,
AND WOUNDED NEARLY 40 PEOPLE.
TALIBAN MILITANTS SAID THEY
CARRIED OUT THE BOMBING TO
ELIMINATE JUDGES WHO WORK FOR
THE WESTERN-BACKED GOVERNMENT.
>> ITS U.S. FISH AND
WILDLIFE SERVICE IS ASKING
THAT ALL CHIMPANZEES BE
LISTED ENDANGERS INCLUDING
THE ROUGHLY 2,000 CHIMP NOUS
CAPTIVITY IN THE U.S.,
UNLIKE THOSE IN THE WILD,
THEY NOW ARE LISTED ONLY AS
THREATENED, CHANGING THEIR
STATUS WOULD MAKE IT HARDER
TO USE CAPTIVE CHIMPS IN
MEDICAL RESEARCH OR TO SELL
THEM ACROSS STATELINES.
A FINAL DECISION IS EXPECTED
NEXT YEAR.
IN ECONOMIC NEWS, WALL STREET
COULD NOT HOLD ITS GROUND TODAY
IN THE FACE OF WORRIES THAT
CENTRAL BANKS AROUND THE WORLD
AREN'T DOING MORE TO BOOST
GROWTH.
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
LOST 116 POINTS TO CLOSE AT
15,122.
THE NASDAQ FELL NEARLY 37 POINTS
TO CLOSE UNDER 3437.
THOSE ARE SOME OF THE DAY'S
MAJOR STORIES.
NOW, BACK TO JUDY.
>> Woodruff: AND WE RETURN TO
THE SURVEILLANCE PROGRAMS AND
THE QUESTIONS SURROUNDING THEM.
BEYOND THE GOVERNMENT ITSELF,
THERE ARE MANY NCERCONS ABOUT
THE ROLE OF COMPANIES LIKE
GOOGLE, FACEBOOK, AND YAHOO THAT
PROVIDE DATA WHEN REQUESTED.
TODAY GOOGLE SENT A LETTER TO
THE DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE AND
THE F.B.I. SAYING IT WANTS TO BE
ALLOWED TO BE MORE TRANSPARENT
ABOUT THE GOVERNMENT'S REQUESTS
"IN TERMS OF BOTH THE NUMBER WE
RECEIVE AND THEIR SCOPE."
JEFFREY BROWN SPOKE WITH
GOOGLE'S CHIEF LEGAL OFFICER,
DAVID DRUMMOND, FROM AMSTERDAM
THIS AFTERNOON.
IT WAS GOOGLE'S FIRST U.S.
BROADCAST INTERVIEW SINCE THE
NEWS BROKE.
>> Brown: DAVID DRUMMOND,
WELCOME.
IN YOUR LETTER TO THE
ATTORNEY GENERAL YOU APPEAR
TO ACKNOWLEDGE THAT GOOGLE
DOES COMPLY WITH GOVERNMENT
REQUESTS FOR USER DATA, SO
THAT IS IN FACT THE CASE?
>> YES, YES, THAT'S THE
CASE.
WE SENT THAT LETTER BECAUSE
THERE'S BEEN A SERIOUS
MISIMPRESSION THAT'S BEEN
CREATED IN THE WAKE OF THE
STORE HE-- STORIES THAT CAME
OUT IN THE LAST FEW DAYS,
STORIES THAT WE WERE AS
SHOCKED BY AS EVERYONE ELSE.
AND THE MISIMPRESSION IS
THAT WE'RE DOING SOME KIND
OF LARGE SCALE OR
PARTICIPATING IN A PROGRAM
THAT DOES LARGE SCALE
SURVEILLANCE ON OUR USERS.
AND THAT'S JUST NOT THE
CASE.
AND WE WANT TO BE ABLE TO BE
MORE TRANSPARENT ABOUT WHAT
WE DO DO WHICH IS
OCCASIONALLY COMPLY WITH
NATIONAL SECURITY ORDERS AS
WERE REQUIRED TO DO.
WHAT WE WOULD LIKE THE
GOVERNMENT TO DO IS TO ALLOW
US TO SAY MORE.
>> Brown: THERE SEEMS TO BE
A DISTINCTION BETWEEN DIRECT
AND INDIRECT ACCESS TO DATA.
WHAT EXACTLY IS THE
GOVERNMENT ALLOWED TO LOOK
AT?
>> LET ME BE VERY CLEAR
ABOUT THIS.
WE DO NOT PARTICIPATE IN ANY
KIND OF A PROGRAM THAT GIVES
THE GOVERNMENT ANY ACCESS
TO-- ACCESS TO OUR SERVERS,
DIRECT OR OTHERWISE, NOR DO
WE ALLOW THE GOVERNMENT TO
PLACE ANY KIND OF EQUIPMENT
ON OUR SYSTEMS.
WHAT WE DO DO AND WHAT WE
HAVE BEEN TRANSPARENT ABOUT
AS MUCH AS WE CAN IS THAT WE
COMPLY FROM TIME TO TIME
WITH THESE GOVERNMENT
ORDERS.
WE TAKE THEM VERY SERIOUSLY.
WE REVIEW THEM VERY
CAREFULLY, WE PUSH BACK IF
THEY ARE OVERBROAD.
AND HERE'S THE IMPORTANT
THING.
WE SERVE HUNDREDS OF
MILLIONS OF USERS.
THE ONLY A TINY, VERY TINY
FRACTION OF OUR USERS HAVE
EVER BEEN SUBJECT TO ONE OF
THESE REQUESTS, NATIONAL
SECURITY REQUESTS.
SO THIS IDEA THAT WE ARE
SORT OF PARTICIPATING IN A
BROAD PROGRAM HERE IS SIMPLY
FALSE.
WE WANT TO MAKE THAT CLEAR
AND WE WANT TO MAKE THAT
CATEGORICALLY CLEAR.
>> Brown: HOW DO THESE
REQUESTS WORK DO YOU GET A
COURT ORDER, WITHOUT SEES IT
ON YOUR END, WHO APPROVES
IT?
>> THESE ARE THE COURT
ORDERS THAT YOU'VE HEARD
ABOUT.
AND WE HAVE A TEAM THAT
HANDLE THESE DIRECTLY.
WE HAVE EXPERIENCE WITH
THOSE.
AS I SAID WE REVIEW THEM
VERY, VERY CAREFULLY.
AND WHEN WE DETERMINE THAT
WE NEED TO COMPLY, THEN WE
DELIVER THE INFORMATION TO
THE GOVERNMENT.
AND IT'S VERY CLEAR.
WE DELIVER IT TO THEM.
WE PUSH IT OUT TO THEM.
THEY DON'T COME ACCESS IT
THROUGH ANY MACHINES AT
GOOGLE.
>> Brown: ARE THERE SPECIFIC
CASES WHERE GOOGLE HAS SAID
NO TO A REQUEST FOR ACCESS?
>> WELL, WE'RE ON RECORD IN
OTHER CONTEXT OF HAVING
PUSHBACK.
SO WE ARE WILLING TO
PUSHBACK IF SOMETHING IS
OVERLY BROAD.
>> Brown: SO PEOPLE WHO ARE
WONDERING WHERE ARE THE
LIMITS WHEN YOU DO COMPLY,
IS THAT A BROAD-BRUSH FOR
DATA OR VERY TARGETED AND
SPECIFIC WITH WHAT THE
GOVERNMENT IS LOOKING FOR?
>> LOOK, ONE OF THE THINGS
WE'RE ASKING HERE, WHAT WE
WROTE IN THE LETTER IS THAT
WE WOULD LIKE TO BE ABLE TOOUT F
THESE REQUESTS THAT WE GET,
WHAT THEY COVER, AND BE MORE
TRANSPARENT ABOUT IT.
WE HAVE PIONEERED THIS
CONCEPT OF BEING TRANSPARENT
ABOUT THE GOVERNMENT
REQUESTS THAT WE GET.
WE THINK IT'S REALLY
IMPORTANT TO CHECK ON OUR
BEHAVIOR, AS A CHECK ON THE
GOVERNMENT'S BEHAVIOR.
AND WE ARE ASKING THE
ATTORNEY GENERAL AND THE FBI
DIRECTOR TO ALLOW US TO
PROVIDE MORE OF THAT
INFORMATION.
BUT WHAT I CAN TELL YOU IS
THAT THESE ARE TARGETED
REQUESTS, AS I SAID, OF THE
HUNDREDS AND HUNDREDS OF
MILLIONS OF USERS.
WE'RE TALKING ABOUT A TINY
FRACTION THAT'S AFFECTED.
AND WE WOULD LIKE TO SAY
MORE ABOUT THAT.
>> Brown: AND WHAT ABOUT
SHARING WITH OTHER
GOVERNMENTS.
WE'RE TALKING ABOUTTHE  U.S.
GOVERNMENT HERE.
DO YOU GET THESE KINDS OF
REQUESTS FROM OTHER
GOVERNMENTS, THE U.K. OR
OTHER ?
>> WE HAVE RECEIVED REQUESTS
FROM OTHER GOVERNMENTS.
FROM TIME TO TIME.
I THINK IT'S IMPORTANT TO
UNDERSTAND THAT GOOGLE IS A
U.S. COMPANY, THE DATA IS
BASED HERE IN THE U.S.
WE TYPICALLY ASK THOSE
COUNTRIES TO GO THROUGH THE
TREATY-BASED
PROCESS-- PROCESS, LAW
ENFORCEMENT TO GET ACCESS TO
THAT MATERIAL.
>> Brown: YOU SOUND VERY
FRUSTRATED JUST LISTENING TO
YOU TALK ABOUT WHAT YOU CAN
AND CANNOT SAY AND ABOUT
WHAT YOU SEE AS
MISPERCEPTIONS ABOUT HOWE
THIS WORKS?
>> IT'S A LITTLE BIT
FRUSTRATING.
BUT THAT'S WHY WE WANT TO
SAY MORE.
BECAUSE WE WANT IT TO BE
CLEAR THAT WHAT THE ACTUAL
FACTS ARE.
AND THERE HAVE BEEN A LOT OF
THINGS BEING SAID ABOUT OUR
PARTICIPATION IN THE PROGRAM
THAT JUST AREN'T TRUE.
AND SO WE REALLY WOULD LIKE
TO SET THE RECORD STRAIGHT.
AS I SAID, WE WERE SURPRISED
ONE, BY THE VERIZON NATIONAL
SECURITY ORDER INVOLVING
PHONE RECORDS.
WE'VE NEVER RECEIVED
ANYTHING SO BROAD.
WE WERE SURPRISED BY THE
ALLEGATIONS MADE ABOUT THE
SO-CALLED PRIS-- SO-CALLED
PRISM PROGRAM.
AND I SAID WE DON'T
PARTICIPATE IN ANYTHING
THAT'S DESCRIBED THERE.
SO WE REALLY WANTED TO GET
THE RECORD STRAIGHT AND WE
WANTED TO MAKE THE REQUEST
OF THE GOVERNMENT, TO HELP
US MAKE, SET THE RECORD
STRAIGHT BY ALLOWING US TO
PROVIDE MORE DETAIL IN OUR
TRANSPARENCY REPORT ABOUT
THESE KINDS OF NATIONAL
SECURITY ORDERS.
>> Brown: DAVID DRUMMOND OF
GOOGLE, THANKS FOR JOINING
US.
>> THANK YOU FOR HAVING ME
>> Ifill: YOU CAN READ GOOGLE'S
LETTER TO THE DEPARTMENT OF
JUSTICE ON OUWEB R SITE.
>> Woodruff: NOW, WHAT'S BEHIND
THE DECISION TO MAKE THE MORNING
AFTER PILL MORE WIDELY
AVAILABLE?
THE BATTLE OVER ACCESS DATES
BACK YEARS, BUT HAS BEEN FOUGHT
IN COURT MOST RECENTLY BY THE
OBAMA ADMINISTRATION.
IN 2011, THE FOOD AND DRUG
ADMINISTRATION DECIDED THE MOST
POPULAR FORM OF THE DRUG, PLAN B
ONE-STEP, SHOULD BE AVAILABLE TO
ALL GIRLS AND WOMEN WITHOUT
PRESCRIPTION.
BUT HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES
SECRETARY KATHLEEN SEBELIUS
OVERRULED THE AGENCY, KEEPING
THE AGE LIMIT AT 17 AND ABOVE.
THIS SPRING, A FEDERAL JUDGE
ORDERED THAT RESTRICTION BE
LIFTED.
AFTER THE JUSTICE DEPARTMENT
INDICATED IT WOULD CONTINUE TO
BATTLE IN COURT, THE
ADMINISTRATION SAID FOR THE
FIRST TIME MONDAY IT WILL NOT
FIGHT THAT DECISION.
JULIE ROVNER OF NPR JOINS US
AGAIN.
WELCOME BACK TO THE
NEWSHOUR.
>> NICE TO BE HERE.
>> Woodruff: WHY IS THE
OBAMA ADMINISTRATION
CHANGING ITS POSITION ON
THIS?
>> BASICALLY IT RAN OUT OF
LEGAL OPTIONS.
THERE WAS AN APPEALS COURT
RULING LAST WEEK THAT SAID
THAT THE ADMINISTRATION
COULD NOT HAVE A STAY OF
THAT JUDGE'S ORDER FROM
APRIL ON ALL FORMS OF THIS
MEDICATION.
SO BASICALLY WHILE THIS
APPEAL WAS BEING HEARD,
WHICH WAS GOING LAST SEVERAL
MONTHS, AT LEAST ONE FORM OF
THIS MEDICATION, THE TWO
PILL VERSION, WHICH IS THE
ORIGINAL VERSION OF PLAN B
AS IT'S CALLED, WOULD HAVE
TO BE AVAILABLE IMMEDIATELY
ON THE SHELVES WITH NO AGE
LIMIT.
AND THE ADMINISTRATION FOUND
THAT SORT OF UNTENABLE.
SO THEY BASICALLY HAVE GONE
BACK AND SAID TO THE JUDGE,
THE ORIGINAL JUDGE, THAT IF
IT'S OKAY WITH HIM, THAT
PLAN B1, THE ORIGINAL PILL,
THEY WOULD MAKE THAT
AVAILABLE WITHOUT AGE
RESTRICTIONS BUT THEY WILL
NOT MAKE THE TWO PILL
VERSION AVAILABLE WITHOUT
AGE RESTRICTIONS.
>> Woodruff: BUT THE PILL
THAT WILL BE, ONE STEP, ONE
PILL, AND THAT'S IT.
THAT'S ALL A PERSON WOULD
NEED TO DO.
SO WHAT DOES THAT MEAN?
WHAT'S GOING TO BE AVAILABLE
AND HOW SOON WILL IT BE
AVAILABLE?
>> WELL, THAT'S NOT ENTIRELY
CLEAR.
THAT IS THE QUESTION
EVERYBODY IS ASKING TODAY.
THERE ARE A COUPLE OF THIS
ING-- COUP EF OF THINGS THAT
HAVE TO HAPPEN FIRST.
THE JUDGE WILL HAVE TO SAY
THAT IS OKAY WITH HIM THAT
IS NOT HIS ORIGINAL ORDER.
ORIGINALLY HE WANTED ALL
VERSIONS OF THIS MEDICATION
MADE AVAILABLE WITHOUT
RESTRICTIONS ON THE PHARMACY
COUNTER, ON THE PHARMACY
SHELVES, EXCUSE ME.
SO THE JUDGE WILL HAVE TO
SAY THAT THAT IS ALL RIGHT
WITH HIM.
IF IT IS, THEN THE COMPANY
THAT MAKES THAT DRUG WILL
HAVE TO APPLY TO THE FDA FOR
A NEW LABEL TO SAY THAT IT'S
AVAILABLE TO WOMEN
REGARDLESS OF AGE.
THE FDA WILL HAVE TO APPROVE
THAT, WHICH THEY SAID THEY
WILL DO ALMOST IMMEDIATELY,
THAT'S WHAT THEY'VE SAID,
WITHOUT DELAY, WERE THEIR
EXACT WORDS, AND THEN IT
WOULD HAVE TO BE APPROVED.
AND THEN IT WOULD BECOME
AVAILABLE.
THE SPECULATION IS THAT THAT
MIGHT TAKE PERHAPS A MONTH
BUT NO ONE KNOWS FOR SURE
EXACTLY HOW LONG THAT WOULD
BE.
>> Woodruff: SO
OVER-THE-COUNTER, JULIE, AND
HOW MUCH IS IT EXPECTED TO
COST?
>> WELL, AND THIS IS THE
RUB.
PLAN B ONE STEP IS THE ONE
BRAND-NAME DRUG OF THIS
CLASS OF DRUGS T COSTS
BETWEEN $40 AND $50 WHICH IS-- .
>> Woodruff: FOR ONE DOSE.
>> FOR ONE DOSE.
IT'S IMPORTANT IF YOU HAVE
HAD UNPROTECTED SEX, WORRIED
ABOUT GETTING PREGNANT.
THAT'S NOT SO MUCH TO SPEND
TO PREVENT AN UNWANTED
PREGNANCY.
THE GENERIC VERSION KASES
CONSIDERABLY LESS, PERHAPS
10, 20, AS MUCH AS 30
DOLLARS LESS.
ACCORDING WHAT THE
ADMINISTRATION HAS PROPOSED
THOSE WILL NOT BE AVAILABLE
ON THE PHARMACY SHELVES
WITHOUT AGE RESTRICTIONS.
SO WOMEN HEALTH GROUPS ARE
NOT VERY HAPPY ABOUT THAT.
>> Woodruff: SO WHAT
REACTION ARE YOU HEARING.
YOU TALKED TO WOMEN'S HEALTH
GROUPS.
YOU HAVE TALKED TO FOLKS ON
THE OTHER SIDE WHAT ARE THEY
SAYING.
>> WOMEN'S HEALTH GROUPS ARE
NOT THAT HAPPY THAT THE
GENERICS WILL NOT BE
INCLUDED IN THIS, OR AT
LEAST IT SEEMS THEY WILL NOT
BE.
>> Woodruff: BECAUSE THAT
MEANS IT WILL BE LESS
EXPENSIVE.
>> EXACTLY, MORE
COMPETITION.
SOME OF THE CONSERVATIVE
GROUPS THAT DIDN'T WANT IT
AVAILABLE WITHOUT
PRESCRIPTION:ARE NOT HAPPY.
THEY ARE NOT HAPPY THE
ADMINISTRATION GAVE UP THE
FIGHT IS SO BASICALLY IT'S
NOT CLEAR WHO IS HAPPY WITH
DHCHLT I THINK THE JUSTICE
DEPARTMENT ISN'T VERY HAPPY
BECAUSE THEY WANTED TO
APPEAL, BUT AS I MENTIONED,
THEY KIND OF RAN OUT MUCH
LEGAL ROPE THERE.
IT LOOKS LIKE FROM WHAT THE
APPEALS COURT DID THAT THEY
WERE GOING TO LOSE SO I
THINK THEY BASICALLY HAD TO
GO BACK AND KIND OF-- .
>> Woodruff: WHICH WOMEN IS
IT BELIEVED WILL TAKE
ADVANTAGE OF THIS,
I MEAN HAVE THERE BEEN
STUDIES DONE.
IS THERE INFORMED
SPECULATION ABOUT WHAT THE
REACTION TO THIS IS GOING TO
BE?
>> THERE HAS BEEN ALL THIS
TALK ABOUT TEENAGERS,
PARTICULARLY YOUNG
TEENAGERS.
ONE OF THE REASON THERE IS
SO LITTLE DATA ON YOUNG
TEENAGERS IS IT IS NOT
THOUGHT THAT IT WILL BE USE
TAD THAT MUCH BY YOUNG TAKEN
AGER-- TEENAGERS.
SHOOT WHERE IT IS SPLIT
WHERE IT IS AVAILABLE FOR
TEENAGERS WITH PRESCRIPTION
AND IT HAS BEEN BEHIND THE
COUNTER SO THEY HAVE HAD TO
ASK FOR IT.
IT IS DIFFICULT FOR WOMEN TO
GET IT ONLY WHEN PHARMACIES
ARE OPEN, THEY HAVE TO SHOW
I.D., A LOT OF WOMEN, LOW
INCOME WOMEN, IMMIGRANT
WOMEN, SOME WOMEN DON'T HAVE
I.D. SO EVEN IF THEY ARE
OBVIOUSLY NOT TEENAGERS,
THEY HAVE HAD DIFFICULTY
GETTING, THAT IS ONE OF THE
IDEAS OF GETTING IT ON THE
SHELVES TO NOT SHOWING I.D.
FOR WOMEN TO GET IT, NOT
NECESSARILY TEENAGERS.
>> Woodruff: MEANING WOMEN
OF AGE.
>> WOMEN OF AGE.
>> Woodruff: CHILD BEARING
AGE.
>> CHILD BEARING AGE, BUT IT
IS THESE YOUNG TEENAGERS
THAT EVERYONE IS CONCERNED
ABOUT.
>> Woodruff: IT IS
INTERESTING YOU BRING THAT
UP.
BECAUSE WE HAPPEN TO KNOW
THAT TEEN BIRTH RATES HAVE
BEEN DROPPING DRAMATICALLY
OVER THE LAST COUPLE OF
DECADES, BUT YOU'RE SAYING
THAT THAT REALLY ISN'T THE
FOCUS HERE.
>> THAT ISN'T.
ALTHOUGH I WILL SAY THAT THE
AMERICAN ACADEMY OF
PEDIATRICS, CONGRESS OF
OBSTETRICIAN AND
GYNECOLOGISTS HAVE ALL SAID
THAT EVERYTHING THEY NIE
FROM THE STUDIES, TEENAGERS
AND SOME YOUNG TEENAGERS TO
THE EXTENT WE HAVE DATA, DO
UNDERSTAND HOW TO USE IT AND
UNDERSTAND THAT IT IS NOT TO
BE USED IN PLACE OF REGULAR
BIRTH CONTROL.
SO IT IS NOT A MATTER THAT
THEY CAN'T USE IT, IT IS
JUST THEY ARE NOT EXPECTED
TO BE THE FOCUS OF WHO WILL
USE IT WITH THE LIFTED
RESTRICTIONS.
>> Woodruff: FINALLY, YOU
WERE SHOWING ME, THIS HAS
BEEN AN ISSUE FOR WELL OVER
A DECADE.
SCIENTISTS HAVE BEEN SAYING,
YOU SAID FROM THE BEGINNING,
ALMOST, THAT THIS IS A SAFE
MEDICATION.
>> YES, IN 2003, TWO
ADVISORY COMMITTEES FOR THE
FDA VOTED OVERWHELMINGLY
THAT THIS WAS WHEN THERE WAS
ONLY THE TWO PILL PRODUCT
THAT IT WAS SAFE TO BE USED
AND THAT IT WAS SAFE ENOUGH
FOR WOMEN OF ALL AGES, FOR
THIS TO BE SOLD
OVER-THE-COUNTER WITHOUT AGE
RESTRICTIONS.
SO IT'S REALLY BEEN A
POLITICAL FIGHT THROUGH TWO
ADMINISTRATIONS NOW.
>> Woodruff: POLITICS,
HMMMM.
ISN'T THAT A SURPRISE.
JULIE RAVNER OF NPR, THANK
YOU VERY MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Ifill: NEXT, WE CONTINUE OUR
WEEK-LONG LOOK AT FOOD SECURITY,
AND HOW CLIMATE CHANGE IS
AFFECTING WHAT WE PRODUCE AND
HOW WE EAT.
TONIGHT, SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT
JON MILLER REPORTS FROM THE TINY
MIDDLE EASTERN NATION OF QATAR
ON INVENTIVE WAYS TO GET THE
MOST OUT OF WATER IN THE DESERT.
IT'S PART OF OUR SERIES, "FOOD
FOR 9 BILLION," IN PARTNERSHIP
WITH PUBLIC RADIO
INTERNATIONAL'S "THE WORLD,"
HOMELAND PRODUCTIONS, AMERICAN
PUBLIC MEDIA'S "MARKETPLACE" AND
THE CENTER FOR INVESTIGATIVE
REPORTING.
>> Reporter: EVERY DAY, HUNDREDS
OF TANKER TRUCKS LINE UP AT THE
MAZROUAH PUMPING STATION OUTSIDE
DOHA, IN THE TINY PERSIAN GULF
NATION OF QATAR.
THEY START ROLLING IN AT 6:30 IN
THE MORNING AND KEEP FILLING UP
UNTIL 10:00 AT NIGHT.
THEIR CARGO IS NOT OIL OR GAS--
THE RESOURCETHAS T HAVE GIVEN
QATAR THE HIGHEST PER CAPITA
INCOME IN THE WORLD-- BUT WATER
FROM AN UNDERGROUND AQUIFER
THAT'S QUICKLY DRYING UP.
>> WE'VE GOT ABOUT TWO YEARS
LEFT OF AN ADEQUATE SUPPLY, A
USABLE SUPPLY OF HIGH-QUALITY
FRESH WATER IN THIS PARTICULAR
AQUIFER.
>> Reporter: JONATHAN SMITH HAS
BEEN THINKING ABOUT WATER SINCE
HE WAS A KID.
HE GREW UP ON A FARM IN
OKLAHOMA, WHERE HIS GRANDPARENTS
LIVED THROUGH THE DUST BOWL.
HE CAME TO QATAR IN 2012 AFTER
MAKING DOCUMENTARIES ABOUT WATER
PROBLEMS IN THE AMERICAN
SOUTHWEST.
NOW HE'S A SPOKESMAN FOR QATAR'S
NATIONAL FOOD SECURITY PROGRAM.
>> IT'S A VERY EXCITING TIME TO
BE IN A PLACE THAT IS STRUGGLING
WITH FOOD SECURITY AND WATER
SECURITY AND REALLY TRYING TO
RETHINK WHAT IT MEANS TO HAVE A
LONG-TERM AND DURABLE
PROSPERITY.
>> Reporter: QATAR IS GROWING
INCREDIBLY FAST.
BUT THE GROWTH MASKS SOME
TROUBLING NUMRS.BE
THE POPULATION-- JUST UNDER TWO
MILLION-- HAS MORE THAN DOUBLED
IN THE LAST TEN YEARS.
THE COUNTRY IMPORTS 93% OF ITS
FOOD.
IT GETS LESS THAN THREE INCHES
OF RAIN A YEAR.
TEMPERATURES TOP 120 DEGREES IN
THE SUMMER.
CLIMATE CHANGE IS JUST GOING TO
MAKE THINGS HARDER.
>> Reporter: QATAR IS IN MANY
WAYS GROUND ZERO FOR MANY OF THE
CHALLENGES WE'RE GOING TO SEE IN
THE NEXT CENTURY.
>> Reporter: ALREADY, 99% OF THE
WATER PEOPLE USE FOR FARMING,
DRINKING, OR SWIMMING COMES FROM
THE SEA.
IT TAKES A HUGE AMOUNT OF ENERGY
TO REMOVE THE SALT-- AND A HUGE
AMOUNT OF MONEY.
FOR NOW, QATAR HAS BOTH.
BUT THE COUNTRY'S LEADERS KNOW
THE OIL AND GAS WON'T LAST
FOREVER.
SO THEY'RE TAKING A RADICAL
STEP: PLANNING AHEAD.
AND NOT JUST FOR THEMSELVES.
WORLDWIDE, MORE THAN TWO BILLION
PEOPLE LIVE IN DRY AREAS, WHERE
CLIMATE CHANGE POSES AN URGENT
THREAT TO FOOD, WATER, AND
ENERGY SUPPLIES.
QATAR'S LEADERS SAY THEY WANT
THEIR COUNTRY TO BE A LABORATORY
FOR SOLVING THOSE PROBLEMS
BEFORE IT'S TOO LATE.
JOAKIM HAUGE IS HAPPY TO TAKE UP
THE CHALLENGE.
HAUGE WAS A BIOLOGIST WORKING
FOR A NORWEGIAN ENVIRONMENTAL
GROUP WHEN HE HEARD ABOUT A PLAN
TO GREEN UP THE DESERTS OF NORTH
AFRICA AND THE MIDDLE EAST.
NOW HE'S THE C.E.O. OF A COMPANY
CALLED THE SAHARA FOREST
PROJECT.
HE SAYS IT WAS FOUNDED NOT ON A
SPECIFIC PRODUCT OR TECHNOLOGY,
BUT ON AN IDEA.
>> AND THAT WAS, WELL, LET'S
TAKE WHAT WE HAVE ENOUGH OF,
LIKE SEAWATER, LIKE SUNLIGHT,
LIKE SAND, LIKE CO2, TO PRODUCE
WHAT WE NEED MORE OF-- FOOD,
WATER, ENERGY-- IN AN
ENVIRONMENTALLY FRIENDLY WAY.
>> Reporter: IN 2012, WITH
BACKING FROM TWO BIG FERTILIZER
COMPANIES, THE GROUP BUILT A
$7.5 MILLION PILOT SITE NEXT TO
A GIANT AMMONIA PLANT IN AN
INDUSTRIAL ZONE OUTSIDE DOHA.
THE DESIGN IS MEANT TO MIMIC A
NATURAL ECOSYSTEM, WHERE THE
WASTE PRODUCT FROM ONE COMPONENT
PROVIDES THE FOOD OR FUEL FOR
ANOTHER.
THE RAW MATERIALS ARE SUNLIGHT
AND SALT WATER.
THESE CURVED MIRRORS INTENSIFY
THE SUNS HEAT TO POWER A THERMAL
DESALINATION UNIT.
SOON ALGAE WILL BE GROWING IN
THESE PONDS, TO BE HARVESTED FOR
BIOFUEL AND, POSSIBLY, TO FEED
FISH OR SHRIMP.
SEAWATER RUNS THROUGH CARDBOARD
PANELS, COOLING THE AIR IN THIS
GREENHOUSE, WHERE CUCUMBERS GROW
IN COCONUT FIBER.
AND CO2 IS PUMPED IN FROM THE
FACTORY NEXT DOOR, MAKING THE
PLANTS GROW DRAMATICALLY FASTER.
>> THESE PLANTS, I WAS HERE
THREE WEEKS AGO, AND THE PLANTS
WERE THIS BIG.
>> Reporter: VIRGINIA CORLESS
HAD GOTTEN HER PH.D IN
ASTROPHYSICS, AND WAS WORKING AT
THE U.S. SENATE WHEN SHE FIRST
HEARD ABOUT THE SAHARA FOREST
PROJECT.
>> I GAVE THE FIRST BROCHURE TO
ALL OF MY SCIENCE FRIENDS IN
D.C. AND SAID, TELL ME WHAT'S
WRONG WITH THIS?
BECAUSE IT SOUNDS GREAT.
IS THERE ANYTHING IM MISSING?
AND OUR CONSENSUS WAS, NO, IT
ACTUALLY... IT ALL HOLDS
TOGETHER.
>> Reporter: TODAY CORLESS IS
THE PROJECT'S RESEARCH DIRECTOR.
>> THE CORE INNOVATION IN THE
SAHARA FOREST PROJECT IS THE
INTEGRATION OF TECHNOLOGIES.
SO WHILE MANY OF THE INDIVIDUAL
TECHNOLOGIES HAVE BEEN DEVELOPED
INDIVIDUALLY ELSEWHERE IN THE
WORLD, THEY'VE NEVER BEEN
BROUGHT TOGETHER IN THIS WAY.
>> Reporter: CORLESS SAYS SHE'S
MOST EXCITED BY AN EXPERIMENT TO
COOL AND MOISTEN THE AIR OUTSIDE
THE GREENHOUSES EVER SO
IGHTSLLY, SO SHRUBS AND TREES
AND EVEN FOOD CROPS CAN TAKE
ROOT AND GROW.
>> AND AS THEY GROW, THEY'RE
ADDING ORGANIC MATERIAL TO THE
SOIL, TO THE SAND.
>> Reporter: IF IT WORKS-- AND
RESULTS HAVE BEEN GOOD SO FAR--
SHE CAN IMAGINE VEGETATION
SPREADING OUT INTO THE
SURROUNDING DESERT, CREATING AN
ECOSYSTEM OF ITS OWN.
THE GOAL?
A SYSTEM TO PRODUCE FOOD AND
WATER AND ENERGY THAT ACTUALLY
REDUCES THE AMOUNT OF CARBON
DIOXIDE IN THE ATMOSPHERE.
CORLESS IS QUICK TO POINT OUT
THAT THIS PILOT SITE IS FOR
TESTING IDEAS, NOT FOR MAKING
MONEY.
ONCE THE KINKS ARE WORKED OUT,
THE GOAL IS TO BUILD MUCH BIGGER
COMMERCIAL FACILITIES AROUND THE
WORLD.
>> THE TECHNOLOGIES THAT ARE
BEING DEVELOPED HERE CAN BE
APPLIED ANYWHERE THAT IS A
DESERT WITH A HOT AND RELATIVELY
DRY CLIMATE AND WHERE YOU HAVE
ACCESS TO SALTY WATER.
THAT'S A LOT OF REGIONS IN THE
WORLD.
>> Reporter: BUT IT'S A RISKY
BUSINESS.
IN A COMPLEX AND EXPENSIVE
SYSTEM LIKE THIS ONE, IF ONE
THING GOES WRONG IT CAN SINK THE
WHOLE ENTERPRISE.
QATARS JONATHAN SMITH SAYS IT'S
GREAT TO THINK BIG, BUT YOU NEED
TO SPREAD YOUR BETS.
>> THE QUESTION OF WHETHER IT'S
A RESPONSIBLE TECHNOLOGY TO
BRING UP TO SCALE, AND WHETHER
IT PROVIDES A RESILIENT ENOUGH
SOLUTION TO CALL IT THE SILVER
BULLET FOR FOOD SECURITY FOR A
COUNTRY, I THINK WE'RE KIDDING
OURSELVES IF WE THINK THAT ANY
SINGLE TECHNOLOGY IS GOING TO DO
THAT.
IT'S GOING TO TAKE A MIX OF
THINGS.
>> Reporter: AND A LOT OF THOSE
THINGS CAN HAPPEN WITH EXISTING
TECHNOLOGY, RIGHT NOW.
TO ILLUSTRATE THE POINT, SMITH
TAKES US TO SEE NASSIR AL-KUWARI
ON HIS FAMILY'S FARM ABOUT AN
HOUR FROM DOHA.
HE'S COVERED HIS CROPS WITH MESH
TO SHADE THEM FROM THE
BLISTERING HEAT.
AND HE'S BUILT HUNDREDS OF LOW-
COST PLASTIC GREENHOUSES.
PLANS ARE TO BUILD HUNDREDS
MORE.
IN THE MEANTIME, HE'S CUT DOWN
ON WATER AND WASTE.
WITH TEMPERATURES RISING AND
GROUNDWATER FALLING, AL-KUWARI
KNOWS HE'S IN A RACE AGAINST
TIME.
BUT HE THINKS HE'S WINNING.
>> PEOPLE THINK THAT QATAR IS
NOTHING BUT DESERT.
BUT WHEN THEY COME HERE, THEY
SEE THAT WE HAVE FERTILE SOIL.
IF WE PROTECT OUR CROPS, I THINK
AGRICULTURE WILL ONLY GET BIGGER
IN THE COMING YEARS.
>> Reporter: THAT'S GOOD.
THE NEXT FEW YEARS WILL BRING
ENORMOUS CHALLENGES FOR THE
WORLD'S DRIEST AREAS, IN ENERGY,
FOOD, AND WATER.
THERE'S NO TELLING WHERE THE
SEARCH FOR SOLUTIONS WILL LEAD.
BUT IT WILL LIKELY BE FUELED BY
RENEWABLE RESOURCES, LIKE
INGENUITY, IMAGINATION, AND
PERSEVERANCE.
>> Woodruff: YOU CAN FIND LINKS
TO STORIES BY OUR PARTNERS IN
THE "FOOD FOR 9 BILLION" SERIES
ON OUR WEB SITE.
AND TOMORROW, WE'LL LOOK
VERTICAL FARM FIELDS THAT RISE
HIGH INTO THE SKIES OVER
SINGAPORE.
>> Ifill: FINALLY TONIGHT, THE
PLEAS OF TWO DESPERATE FAMILIES
SHIFT THE ETHICAL DEBATE ABOUT
ORGAN TRANSPLANT POLICIES FOR
CHILDREN.
RAY SUAREZ HAS THE STORY.
>> Suarez: THE CASES OF
TEN-YEAR-OLD SARA MURNAGHAN
AND 11-YEAR-OLD JAVIER
ACOSTA HAVE PUT A NATIONAL
1309 LIGHT ON THE ISSUE,
BOTH HAVE END-STAGE CYSTIC
FIBROSIS.
BUT THEY ARE AT THE BOTTOM
OF A WAITING LIST FOR A
ADULT LUNGS BECAUSE THEY'RE
UNDER 12.
U.S. SENATOR PAT TOOMEY OF
PENNSYLVANIA, SARA MURNAGHAN'S
HOME STATE, SAYS THAT HAS TO
CHANGE.
>> SARA IS BEING TREATED BY
SOME OF THE BEST DOCTORS IN
THE WORLD AND THEY ARE
CONVINCED THAT SHE'S AN
EXCELLENT CANDIDATE TO HAVE
A SUCCESSFUL TRANSPLANTS
SURGERY.
IT SEEMS TO ME A POLICY THAT
SYSTEMICALLY EXCLUDES HER
AND OTHER CHILDREN IN HER
CIRCUMSTANCES IS A FLAWED
POLICY.
>> Suarez: LAST WEEK FEDERAL
DISTRICT JUDGE IN
PHILADELPHIA ORDERED A
CHANGE IN TRANSPLANT POLICY
FOR BOTH CASES, AND SAID THE
CHILDREN MUST BE PLATESED
HIGHER ON THE WAITING LIST.
THAT PROMPTED SOME DOCTORS
TO SAY COURTS HAVE NO
BUSINESS DECIDING ON MEDICAL
MATTERS.
>> I DON'T THINK WE WANT
JUDGES MAKING MEDICAL
DECISIONS ANY MORE THAN WE
WANT DOCTORS DECIDING
SUPREME COURT CASES.
>> Suarez: NOW THE ORGAN
PROCUREMENT AND
TRANSPLANTATION NETWORK IS
SETTING UP AN APPEAL PROCESS
FOR CHILDREN UNDER 12.
FOR MORE ON THE CASE
FOR MORE ON THE CASE,
YESTERDAY'S DECISION AND THE
ISSUES INVOLVED, WE TURN TO
ARTHUR CAPLAN, DIRECTOR OF THE
DIVISION OF MEDICAL ETHICS AT
NEW YORK UNIVERSITY'S LANGONE
MEDICAL CENTER.
DOCTOR,
THE NEW RULES PROPOSED IN
THE VOTE LAST NIGHT, WHAT
WOULD THEY DO HOW WOULD THEY
CHANGE THINGS?
>> WELL, THEY DON'T REALLY
CHANGE THE, IF YOU WILL,
UNDER 12 RULE, THAT IS
SAYING THAT CHILDREN CAN'T
GET ORGANS FROM ADULTS.
WHAT THEY DO DO IS MAKE A
PATH FOR AN EXCEPTION, MAKE
A PATH FOR COMPASSIONATE
EXAMINATION OF A PARTICULAR
CASE SO IF YOU WILL, THEY
CREATED AN APPEALS PROCESS.
IT WILL BE IN THE HANDS OF
DOCTORS TO MAKE AN
ASSESSMENT CASE BY CASE OF
WHETHER A YOUNGER CHILD
COULD ACCEPT OR WHETHER
ORGAN WAS FIT INTO A KID
UNDER 12 WHEN THEY COME FROM
AN ADULT.
WE HAVEN'T HAD THAT APPEALS
PROCESS BEFORE.
SO THAT IS A SIGNIFICANT
CHANGE.
>> Suarez: WHY WERE THE
RULES WRITTEN THE WAY THEY
WERE IN THE FIRST PLACE?
IT WASN'T AN OUTRIGHT
PROHIBITION BUT IT WAS A
FORMULA THAT DISCOURAGED THE
USE OF ADULT DONOR LUNGS IN
THE CHESTS OF CHILDREN.
>> THE MAIN REASON IS
BECAUSE ADULT DONOR LUNGS
ARE LARGE AND KIDS UNDER 12
ARE SMALL.
AND THE LUNGS DON'T FIT.
SO YOU WIND UP HAVING TO USE
A PIECE OF THE LUNG, IF YOU
WILL, TAKING OUT A LOBE AND
PUTTING IT IN.
NOW UNLIKE OTHER ORGANS LIKE
THE LIVER, THE LUNG DOESN'T
GROW BACK.
SO A LOT OF SURGEONS HAVE
FELT IF YOU ARE GOING TO
TRANSPLANT A LOBE OF LUNG,
THAT IS RISKIER, MORE PRONE
TO TROUBLE.
OTHERS DISAGREE.
BUT THE BASIS OF THE RULE
WAS PARTLY DUE TO THE SIZE
PROBLEM.
AND THEN SOME OF THE
CHALLENGES THAT YOUNGER KIDS
POSE IN TERMS OF I MONEYO
SUPPRESSION.
THE DRUGS YOU HAVE TO TAKE
AFTER YOU GET A TRANSPLANT.
BOTH OF THOSE FACTORS WERE
SEEN, IF YOU WILL AS
DIMINUTE UING THE CHANCE OF
SUCCESS BY MANY IN THE
TRANSPLANT FIELD.
>> Suarez: NOW
UNDERSTANDABLY-- ABLY THE
CASE OF THE MURNAGHAN AND
ACOSTA FAMILIES YOU HAD
FAMILIES GOING PUBLIC,
HEADING INTO THE COURT OF
PUBLIC OPINION TO PLEAD
THEIR CASE.
IS THAT A GOOD PLACE TO MAKE
MEDICAL DECISIONS ABOUT
TRANSPLANTATION?
>> I DON'T THINK SO.
IT IS PERFECTLY
UNDERSTANDABLE THAT A FAMILY
WOULD SAY I'M GOING TO DO
EVERYTHING I CAN FOR MY
CHILD.
HIRE A PR FIRM, GET MY
CONGRESSMAN OR SENATOR TO
PAY ATTENTION.
BUT IT'S NOT THE BEST WAY TO
ALLOCATE THE SCARCE SUPPLY
OF ORGANS THAT WE HAVE.
WE HAVE A SITUATION WHERE IF
YOU REALLY LEAVE IT UP TO
WHO CAN MOUNT THE BIGGEST
PUBLICITY CAMPAIGN, YOU'RE
NOT NECESSARILY GOING TO SEE
LUNGS OR ANY OTHER ORGANS
GOING TO THOSE WHO MIGHT
BENEFIT THE MOST.
SO TO ME, IT'S PARTLY, IT'S
FULLY UNDERSTANDABLE THAT A
PARENT WOULD WANT TO TRY AND
SAVE THEIR CHILD.
BUT YOU DON'T WANT TO HAVE A
KIND OF BIDDING WAR WHERE
PEOPLE CAN SPEND THE MOST
MONEY, ARE THE MOST PR SAVVY,
WHO CAN CAN WIELD THE MOST
INFLUENCE WITH A CONGRESS
PERSON ARE GOING TO WIN A
SHOT AT GETTING AN ORGAN.
I THINK IT'S BETTER LEFT
MORE OR LESS INSIDE THE
TRANSPLANT COMMUNITY WITH
THE TRANSPLANT EXPERTS TO
DECIDE WHO IS THE BEST
CANDIDATE.
>> Suarez: IN THIS AREA, DO
MEDICAL DECISIONS RUN ON A
KIND OF DIFFERENT TRACT FROM
ETHICAL ONES?
ARE THERE THINGS THAT ARE
ETHICALLY DODGY THAT WOULD
WORK MEDICALLY OR MEDICALLY
DODGY THAT ARE DEFENSIBLE
ETHICALLY?
>> THAT'S A GREAT QUESTION.
AND IT WOULD TAKE MORE TIME
THAN WE'VE GOT.
BUT THE ANSWER IS YES.
FOR EXAMPLE, A LOT OF
PROGRAMS DON'T ADMIT PEOPLE
WHO SMOKE MARIJUANA.
IT IS SEEN AS SUBSTANCE
ABUSE.
ON THE OTHER HAND WE'VE GOT
TWO STATES WHERE IT'S BEEN
LEGALIZED.
A LOT OF STATES WHERE
MEDICAL MARIJUANA USE IS
ACCEPTED.
SHOULD MARIJUANA USE BE AN
EXCLUSION, IS PARTLY A
MEDICAL QUESTION BUT NOW
IT'S BECOMING PARTLY AN
ETHICAL AND LEGAL QUESTION
IN TERMS OF SEEING AN
ACCEPTED AS PART OF, YOU
KNOW, ODE BEHAVIOR IN MANY
PARTS OF THE COUNTRY.
SHALL WHETHER PRISONERS
SHOULD HAVE ACCESS TO ORGANS,
WHETHER SOMEONE WITH A
SEVERE MENTAL DISABILITY
SHOULD BE CONSIDER ADD LONG
WITH OTHERS WHEN THEY NEED A
HEART TRANSPLANT, LET'S SAY.
SO THE AREA IS FRAUGHT ABOUT
TOUGH ETHICAL CHOICES BUT I
DON'T MEAN TO SAY THAT, YOU
KNOW, IT'S JUST UP TO
DOCTORS AND JUST UP TO
TRANSPLANT SURGEONS.
BUT PRIMARILY, WHAT YOU WANT
TO KNOW IS WHAT IS GOING TO
WORK?
WHAT'S GOING TO SUCCEED?
AND THEN LET'S ARGUE ABOUT
OTHER BEHAVIORAL,
PSYCHOLOGICAL, OTHER FACTORS
THAT MIGHT IMPACT WITHOUT
GOES FIRST.
>> Suarez: WELL, GIVE US A
THUMBNAIL SKETCH OF HOW THE
SYSTEM ROUTINELY WORKS.
THERE ARE PEOPLE WHO NEED
VARIOUS BODY PARTS.
THERE ARE DONORS THAT BECOME
AVAILABLE.
HOW DOES IT NORMALLY WORK?
>> SO IT'S A TWO-STEP
PROCESS.
ONE STEP IS HOW DO YOU GET
INTO A PARTICULAR FRANCE
PLANT-- TRANSPLANT CENTER.
EACH CENTER MAKES DECISION
APPROXIMATES ABOUT THE KIND
OF PATIENT THAT THEY THINK
THEY COULD HANDLE.
SOMETIMES IT'S MONEY.
IF YOU DON'T HAVE INSURANCE,
YOU MAY NOT BE UP, ACCEPTED
INTO A PROGRAM THAT HAS A
LUNG TRANSPLANT OR LIVER
TRANSPLANTS.
THEY'RE COSTLY AND PEOPLE DO
GET TURNED AWAY BECAUSE THEY
CAN'T PAY.
CITIZENSHIP MIGHT COUNT, ARE
YOU AN ILLEGAL ALIEN.
THAT MIGHT MATTER TO
DIFFERENT HOSPITALS.
AND AS I SAID, ISSUES AROUND
DRUG ABUSE OR DO YOU HAVE A
CRIMINAL RECORD, ARE YOU
PSYCHOLOGICALLY OR
PSYCHIATICALLY VERY
DISTURBED, MAKE IT UNLIKELY
YOU COULD COMPLY.
THAT'S THE FIRST TEST.
ONCE YOU GET IN, ALL THE
NAMES OF THE PEOPLE WHO GET
INTO A TRANCE PLANT CENTER
ARE ON A NATIONAL LIST.
AND DISTRIBUTION FROM THAT
NATIONAL LIST IS HANDLED BY
THE UNITED NETWORK FOR ORGAN
SHARING, A FEDERALLICALLY
CHARTERED GROUP THAT
OPERATES WITH THESE RULES WE
KEEP HEARING ABOUT.
SO THINK OF IT AS TWO-STEPS.
ONE, EACH INDIVIDUAL
TRANSPLANT CENTER MAKES THE
CALL.
ARE WE GOING TO TAKE YOU.
WE'RE NOT.
AND THEY MAY BE DIFFERENT
PLACE TO PLACE.
ONCE ON THE LIST, THE
DISTRIBUTION OF ORGANS IS
HANDLED BY A NATIONAL
PROGRAM WITH VERY CLEAR-CUT
RULES ABOUT WHO GOES FIRST.
>> Suarez: WE'RE JUST ABOUT
AT THE END OF OUR TIME.
BUT I'M GUESSING ALL THESE
PROBLEMS ARE JUST MADE MORE
DIFFICULT BY A SHORTAGE OF
DONORS.
>> THEY REALLY ARE.
AND WHEN YOU HEAR ABOUT A
TERRIBLE MIGHT OF THESE
FAMILIES LOOKING FOR LUNGS,
YOU HAVE TO KEEP IN MIND
THAT PEOPLE ARE DYING EVERY
DAY FOR WANT OF A HEART,
LUNG OR LIVER.
SO IT'S CRUCIAL TO SIGN YOUR
DONOR CARD.
IT'S CRUCIAL TO TALK ABOUT
THAT DECISION WITH YOUR
FAMILY SO THEY KNOW THAT'S
WHAT YOU WANT.
YOUR FRIENDS AND PARTNERS,
THEY SHOULD KNOW THAT'S YOUR
WISHES.
AND WE MIGHT GIVE A LONG
HARD LOOK IN THIS COUNTRY
AGAINST MOVING TO A PRESUMED
CONSENSUS TO MEANING,
INSTEAD OF HAVING A POLICY
THAT SAYS JUMP INTO THE
SYSTEM, SIGN A CARD IF YOU
WANT TO DO THIS.
LET'S GO WITH WHAT MOST
PEOPLE SAY THEY WANT TO DO
WHICH IS TO BE AN ORGAN
DONOR AND ASK THOSE WHO
DON'T WANT TO TO OPT OUT
THAT WOULD GET US MORE
ORGANS, HELP RESOLVE SOME OF
THESE TENSIONS ABOUT WHO
SHOULD LIVE AND WHO SHOULD
DIE.
>> Suarez: DR. KAPLAN,
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
>> MY PLEASURE.
>> Woodruff: AGAIN, THE MAJOR
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE DAY.
U.S. LAWMAKERS CALLED FOR EDWARD
SNOWDEN, THE MAN BEHIND THE LEAK
OF CLASSIFIED GOVERNMENT
SURVEILLANCE PROGRAMS, TO BE
PROSECUTED TO THE FULL EXTENT OF
THE LAW.
THE IMMIGRATION REFORM BILL IN
THE U.S. SENATE CLEARED A KEY
HURDLE.
IT GARNERED WELL MORE THAN THE
60 VOTES NEEDED TO BEGIN FORMAL
DEBATE.
AND AUTHORITIES IN TURKEY
DEMANDED AN END TO TEN DAYS OF
ANTIGOVERNMENT PROTESTS.
RIOT POLICE TARGETED THOUSANDS
OF PEOPLE IN CENTRAL ISTANBUL
WITH WATER CANNON AND TEAR GAS.
>> Ifill: ONLINE, A COLLEGE
PROFESSOR INSPIRES HIS STUDENTS
FROM THE GRAVEYARD.
KWAMHOLME AN HAS THE DETAILS.
>> Holman: IN OUR LATEST IN A
SERIES OF OLDER WORKER PROFILES,
MEET POLITICAL SCIENCE PROFESSOR
RONALD STOCKTON.
WITH NO PLANS TO RETIRE, THE 72-
YEAR-OLD STILL LEADS ENERGETIC
WALKS THROUGH CEMETERIES AS PART
OF HIS GRAVEYARDS 101 CLASS AT
THE UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN,
DEARBORN.
>> WE SPOKE WITH AUTHOR
GERON WHO THINKS CHARGING
FOR OUR INFORMATION IS MORE
EFFECTIVE THAN ENACTING
PRIVACY LAWS.
>> AND ON
AND ON ART BEAT, THE NATIONAL
MALL IN WASHINGTON, D.C.,
DISAPPEARED FOR 48 HOURS UNDER A
SEA OF CLAY, PLASTER, AND PAPER
BONES.
IT WAS A VISUAL PETITION AGAINST
ONGOING GENOCIDE AROUND THE
WORLD.
SEE THE STUNNING IMAGES ON OUR
HOMEPAGE.
ALL THAT AND MORE IS ON OUR WEB
SITE, newshour.pbs.org.
JUDY?
>> Woodruff: AND AGAIN, TO OUR
HONOR ROLL OF AMERICAN SERVICE
PERSONNEL KILLED IN THE
AFGHANISTAN CONFLICT.
WE ADD THEM AS THEIR DEATHS ARE
MADE OFFICIAL AND PHOTOGRAPHS
BECOME AVAILABLE.
HERE, IN SILENCE, ARE EIGHT
MORE.
>> Woodruff: AND THAT'S THE
NEWSHOUR FOR TONIGHT.
ON WEDNESDAY, WE'LL LOOK AT HOW
OLDER WORKERS HELP SOCIAL
SECURITY'S LONGEVITY.
I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
>> Ifill: AND I'M GWEN IFILL.
WE'LL SEE YOU ON-LINE, AND AGAIN
HERE TOMORROW EVENING.
THANK YOU, AND GOOD NIGHT.